- Hello, I'm Davin Reckow with Hagerty.
I'm the automotive content specialist.
- My name is Ben Woodworth.
I'm one of the video production guys here
at Hagerty and the one behind the camera
in all these Redline
Rebuilds that you guys
have been liking.
- [Davin] Today we're
going to talk about our
Ford flathead video that
we did a few months ago
and show you some of the finer pieces and
some of the not-so-fine pieces.
Anything we missed that you've still got
questions about, shoot
them to us and we'll
do our best to answer them.
Let's get on with it, though.
All right, so this is
our 1946 Swap to Street
Challenge truck.
The four of us put this truck together.
We drove it roughly 740
miles, I think it was,
back to the Traverse City office here
from Hershey, Pennsylvania.
Matt and I did some real
quick, we had one-week
turnaround, basically,
to get the car, the truck
prepped to drive to SEMA
in Las Vegas which was
roughly 2500 miles, I think it was.
And we made it there,
famously, with no issues,
although it was starting to
be a little under-powered
and we were starting to
feel some of the aches
and pains of a truck built in four days.
And got it back and
then when the time came,
we decided we should pull the motor and go
through it, so that's
what we're doing here,
is actually pulling the motor back out.
We use an engine-leveler.
That's key in this situation, especially
when you're pulling the transmission.
You can see the mad angle that you're
lifting it out at.
With those pullers, you can get it
almost vertical coming up out of there
if you absolutely have to.
- [Ben] So that's the
yellow piece with the
chains attached.
- [Davin] That's correct, yep.
- [Ben] So it allows
you to tilt the engine
back and forth?
- [Davin] Yes, yep.
- [Ben] So you can pull it out without
banging it into things.
- [Davin] Yeah, exactly.
And it leaves the heavy lifting
to the equipment as opposed to the
folks trying to do it.
- Oh yeah, I see it now.
- [Davin] And now see, we leveled it out.
- [Ben] So the transmission
is still attached.
- [Davin] Yep.
- [Ben] But 8BA is on the heads.
- [Davin] Correct, so
that signifies that its
a later model, so a '49 to '53.
Again, so does the
distributor, so the heads,
if you will, match the rest of the engine.
- [Ben] Oh, now we're
dropping in to the thick
of things here.
- [Davin] Yes.
- [Ben] This is our engine.
- [Davin] So right here,
you'll see the water
pump pulleys and then the two outlets for
the water pumps.
Something else that's
unique with a Ford flathead
is there's two water pumps.
Most vehicles, most engines, only have one
water pump that feed
both sides of the block.
The Ford flathead does
not have a crossover tube
going between right and
left-hand sides of the engine
so the, it needs two
independent water pumps.
- [Ben] For an old crusty
engine, it's pretty
cool-looking.
- [Davin] Yes.
- [Ben] Eww, what's going
on with the exhaust?
- [Davin] Well, you can see
that we're having a little
bit of coolant leak
out of the head on that
far left side.
- [Ben] It looks like we have--
- [Davin] And we have a
couple stacks of extra,
this is the issue with
when you're building
a motor on, in a four-days
deal where you have
limited resources.
You can see the exhaust
bolt on the right-hand
side there is a little
bit long, but with enough
half-inch hex nuts, it
shims it up just fine.
So, coil off, here's the distributor,
brand-new looking fresh
contacts on that rotor.
So here we're taking
the intake manifold off.
Stock intake manifold,
two-barrel carburetor,
original three-bolt Ford.
- [Ben] So there are a
crapload of bolts to take off.
- [Davin] This has a lot, I
think it's 24 or 26 per head.
I forget the exact number.
- [Ben] Does that, is that good?
Is that bad?
Like, what was up with their design that--
- [Davin] Well, I find
it interesting for the
lack of compression that
it needs so many bolts
to hold it down, but I'm
not, at the same time,
that's a huge piece of
cast iron to hold flat
and I think that's what
the bolts are doing more
than anything, is just
trying to hold a warped
piece of cast iron flat.
- [Ben] Uh-huh.
- [Davin] So, yeah.
- [Ben] So immediately,
right away, again, I know
enough about engines to
get me in trouble, but
this doesn't look like most engines that--
- [Davin] Nope.
- [Ben] I've seen.
- [Davin] This is, the function
of a flathead by naming
convention is the head does
not have any valves in it.
It's flat.
All the valves are right
in the engine block.
So that means the seats
are in the engine block.
The valve springs,
everything is in the block
not in the heads.
When the intake charge
comes in, it has to make
a 90-degree angle into
the, into the cylinder bore
which can get ugly.
- [Ben] So just, essentially, that means
it is not efficient.
- [Davin] It is not
efficient at all, nope.
It is, for all practical,
it is an eight-cylinder
lawn mower engine by today's standards.
- [Ben] All right.
So moving on, getting the other head off.
I mean, how is this thing
looking at this point?
You guys have driven it around a bunch.
We didn't really know
what was inside it when
we bought it, so it, was this all sort of
like a surprise to you?
- [Davin] No, this is
pretty well what I expected
on the top side.
The real concern I had
was what did the bearings
look like in the bottom end.
But, I mean, I expected it
to be as rusty and crusty,
if you will, as far as
the ports were concerned,
specifically in the
water jackets and really,
the cylinders didn't look too bad.
The rings were tired.
- [Ben] So here, off comes
the exhaust manifold.
- [Davin] Nice shot of it
rotating, engine rotating.
You can see there's a
lot of carbon buildup.
Evidently we didn't get on the gas enough.
- [Ben] All right, so what's this?
- [Davin] So this is the
front of the crankshaft
which has your pulleys for
the water pumps and the fan.
And then behind that is the balancer.
- [Ben] That looks like a cool tool.
- [Davin] Yep, gear puller.
So there we have, one
thing that's awesome about
the Ford flathead is you
never have to worry about
stretching the timing chain
because it doesn't have one.
- [Ben] Oh, because normally
you're, what we have the
crankshaft and the camshaft here.
- [Davin] Yep, yeah.
So the big gear is your
timing gear and then the
bottom gear, the smaller
one, is your crankshaft gear.
And yeah, so normally, in
most engines, you would
have a timing chain or
belt in today's world.
But these did not use that.
It was gear-to-gear.
- So it was direct meshed.
- [Davin] Yes.
- [Ben] So basically the
main thing we have to do
is make sure that your
teeth are in the right spot.
- [Davin] Correct.
- [Ben] And from there, you're good to go.
- [Davin] Right.
Yep, but I would say one
little issue that they
would have is the fact
that the timing gear is
a nylon-toothed deal.
- [Ben] Oh, so even though
that's all black and grimey,
it's actually plastic.
- [Davin] It's actually plastic, yes.
So obviously those could deteriorate and
bust off and what not.
And the reason that
they're nylon or whatever
the official material is,
is it quiets things down.
It's not as loud.
Otherwise it would, it would
hum like a son-of-a-gun.
- [Ben] So here, what are you doing?
You've got this big pry bar.
- [Davin] All right.
Yeah, I found that this
was probably the ugliest
part of the whole teardown,
and installation for
that matter, but it's
pulling these springs out.
There's a, in theory,
they're one assembly.
But, given all the sludge and nastiness,
there's a retainer in
there and some keepers
you've got to lift up
and pull out and tap out
and beat them and yeah,
that part was kind of ugly.
So this is our truck oil
pan that we had to search
high and low for.
- [Ben] What would have
been the difference?
The one that was on
there when you guys got
the engine, would have looked like what?
- [Davin] Yeah, the
difference was, is where that
rear bump-out is, it's
back further to clear
the crossmember in the truck.
The car crossmember is
further forward towards
the front of the engine,
which is to your right.
So it had a larger sump, if
you will, on the car pan.
- [Ben] Okay, so here's the big reveal.
The oil pan comes off, and we've got this.
Holy--
- [Davin] This, uh, you
know what this reminds me of
is a lava flow is what I think of.
You know, after everything has been burnt.
- [Ben] Right. It's like
solidified volcanic rock.
- [Davin] Yes.
- [Ben] That is gross.
So what's popping up here?
- [Davin] So that is the oil pickup tube.
This is certainly a
testament of change your oil
more often than not, because
this ran the same oil
for a long time.
- [Ben] You can't even
see, like any parts of
the actual metal.
- [Davin] Oh, yeah, yeah.
I forgot that it was this dirty.
- [Ben] Okay, what's going on now?
You're pulling some parts off.
I see a hammer.
I see a piece of lead rod.
- [Davin] We're taking
the pistons out here,
so we're disconnecting
the caps from the rods and
hammering the pistons
out of the bottom, out of
the top surface or bottom
surface in this case.
And of course we're
strategically placing the
long rod and tapping it
with a hammer so we're not
destroying the rod because
we're going to reuse
the rods and the pistons
we had already planned
on replacing.
The pistons for this are dirt cheap.
I mean, they're almost
as cheap as a small block
Chevy so the intention
was never to reuse them.
- [Ben] All right, so here
we're looking at the bottom.
- [Davin] Yep, here's the
bottom, here's one of the--
- [Ben] Piston dropping out.
- [Davin] Yep, here's a piston coming out.
As it rotated, we had to pull them out.
I'll say if the Ford flathead
has any weakness for power,
it is the fact that it only
has three main cams in it.
- [Ben] So how does that affect power?
- [Davin] Well, it affects
power because you have,
you only have three
journals as opposed to, say,
five or four.
- [Ben] So you're saying
journals instead of
five or four, it spins--
- [Davin] Relative to the block.
- [Ben] Okay.
- [Davin] So what's holding
the crankshaft into the block.
So you have three
supports, yeah, so there's
three supports instead of four or five.
- [Ben] So what's sitting
in here right now?
- [Davin] So what you
have is what they call
a half shell, or a shell bearing.
So they're a multi-layer
of different alloys
to basically spin on.
That's your bearing surface.
- [Ben] Okay.
So most people think of a bearing as--
- [Davin] Having a needle
bearing or a ball bearing.
- [Ben] Right, like something
actually moving inside.
- [Davin] Correct.
- [Ben] But these are, the
only thing that's between
these bearings and the
crankshaft itself is the oil.
- [Davin] Is a real
thin layer of oil, yep.
- [Ben] So, in this, I
guess another way of putting
it is that the oil is
the balls or the needles
in this type of bearing.
- [Davin] Yes, correct.
- [Ben] All right, now
it looks like you're
attacking that plastic piece.
- [Davin] Yeah, with, it
has some, like a retainer
clip that flips over the bolt head so they
don't back out.
- [Ben] Looks like somebody's
keeping a screwdriver--
- [Davin] Yep.
- [Ben] Just to keep it
from spinning on you.
- [Davin] Yep, you've got to have some way
to resist that torque.
- [Ben] All right, so there it comes.
- [Davin] Yep, so there's your,
so your timing gear is off, that reveals
the camshaft.
- [Ben] And here it comes.
Now this, is this also a reusable item
or is this a replace item item, maybe the
wear on the--
- [Davin] We could have, with some good
close inspection on a
camshaft, you can reuse
a camshaft.
We wanted something a little better than
the stock cams.
- [Ben] All right, now
we're dropping into Thirlby.
I love this place.
- [Davin] Yes.
- [Ben] These guys are awesome.
- [Davin] Yes, they are.
- [Ben] So what's going on here?
What are these three huge green things?
- [Davin] So they have, this
is their cleaning process.
It's, you know, your fire and brimstone,
your shot peen and your wash.
- [Ben] Here's the block.
- [Davin] Yep, this is the
three-step cleaning process.
- [Ben] Oh yeah, wow, look at that.
Already, it looks like a
brand new block.
- Already better, yes.
Much better.
- [Ben] And he's just
getting rid of all that
bead blast stuff.
- [Davin] Yeah, just a little, yeah.
Little more attention
to the details there.
Cleaning all the thread
ports and passages out.
- [Ben] Yeah, I mean, it
looks brand new at that point.
- [Davin] Mm-hmm.
- [Ben] Okay, so over--
- [Davin] So what this
is, is he is magnafluxing
the box.
So basically that's a
magnet and he's puffing a
little iron powder at it
and the way the process
works is if there's a
crack, it will highlight
the crack.
I guess it's not magnafluxing, but--
- [Ben] Okay, so no cracks in the block.
Good to go.
- [Davin] Correct.
Even though there are,
Ford flatheads are very
known to crack on the top
of that cylinder surface
between the two, between
the bores, specifically
where the head bolts go through.
- [Ben] Uh-huh.
- [Davin] It will spider-crack out.
It's fairly thin in there.
Mike's going through and cleaning up that
bore, or the deck surface for the heads,
so it's a nice, clean,
flat and perpendicular
to the pistons.
And typically you don't end up milling the
top surface where the intake manifold goes
unless there's something that's drastic.
- [Ben] How's that, just
because there's not--
- [Davin] Well, you've
got a lot of sealant
that's on there.
It's not as critical.
- [Ben] What's going on here?
- [Davin] So here, Mike's
going through and boring
the cylinder walls out 30
thousandths on this one,
on these bores here.
- [Ben] Now is this pretty, is that bore
pretty typical for this?
Is it easy to find pistons at that--
- [Davin] Yeah.
- [Ben] Pistons and rings?
- [Davin] Yeah, for all
intents and purposes,
most engines you can get
pistons in a 30, 40 and a 60.
There's also other variations but that's a
pretty standard off-the-shelf piston.
- [Ben] All right, so it's all bored out.
And now--
- [Davin] Now to the hone process.
- [Ben] We've seen this
in all the rebuild videos.
- [Davin] Yep, this is very, very typical
You go through and you do a final bore, or
cutting process, and now
this is the final finish
where you hone out, typically,
five or 10 thousandths
depending on what the machinist prefers.
And that gives you that
beautiful crosshatch
which allows the rings to
actually, it finish files
the rings to fit the bore.
And then, of course that's
all lubricated with coolant
so the stone doesn't load up.
- [Ben] Mike looks like
he's done this a few times.
- [Davin] Uh, yeah.
- [Ben] All right.
- [Davin] Now this is where
things are slightly different
than your typical block.
Back to the quote, unquote,
head portion of this.
So instead of having a small
head over at the cylinder
head area, you have the whole block.
And Mark's doing the seats and such,
seats and guides right here, on his bench
that's not really used
to having a full block
there because of the--
- [Ben] So, seats and guides.
- [Davin] So you have--
- [Ben] Can you explain that to me?
- [Davin] So, a valve
has a big large diameter
that has the seat on it.
That's what you, the hole
that you see right now.
And then you have a
guide that's down further
from the stem, a smaller
portion of the valve.
- [Ben] Where the valve
is actually being held.
- [Davin] Right.
- [Ben] Or it's going up and down in that.
- [Davin] Yep, the seat
is your sealing portion,
regardless of the exhaust or intake.
And then the guide is
what holds it in the block
and keeps it located to the seat.
Here he's got the rods in
the pin vise, or rod vise,
so he's basically going
through and torquing the
nuts onto there.
You can see the torque wrench there.
- [Ben] So he's tightening them on there,
obviously you can't put
it on the engine that way.
He's, why is he putting them
on now and torquing them?
- [Davin] Well, he's
torquing them down because
he's going to go and
measure the big end and make
sure it's true.
And then if it's not
true, there's a hone that
he can go through and resize them.
So, over time, they will,
they'll stretch around and--
- [Ben] Basically like an
oval instead of a circle.
- [Davin] Exactly.
- [Ben] Okay, so that
machine does essentially
what that honing,
the big up and down machine--
- Same as the block
- [Ben] For the block does.
- [Davin] But the
function is, it's still to
get a perfect size to that hole.
- [Ben] Okay, so he's
sliding it in and out
and that thing's spinning.
And then what's he doing
up here on the left?
- [Davin] He's checking it for size.
- [Ben] Okay, so that's just
a micrometer of some sort?
- [Davin] Correct.
And he'll do the same thing
on the small end as well.
- [Ben] Oh, there they are.
- [Davin] There, they're done.
- [Ben] Good to go.
- [Davin] Now we're at the
paint booth, taping it off.
Something to note, we've
done this actually in all
the engines, but when possible,
we use automotive paint.
In this case, for timing,
we were not able to use
the automotive paint, so
here we're going to use
the standard HBT engine
paint, high-temperature,
quote, unquote, high-temperature paint.
Taping all the machined
surfaces off and only
to where the cast iron
exposed surfaces are.
Of course prepping any
parts in a solvent tank.
- [Ben] So essentially they used those big
green tanks to clean off
all the stuff on the block,
so now you're just getting
the rest of the bits
that are getting--
- [Davin] Exactly.
- [Ben] Painted and ready to go.
- [Davin] This into a
sandblasting cabinet using
glass beads, actually,
pulls off all the rust
and whatever's left, to
get a nice, clean surface.
- [Ben] Yeah, it looks brand new almost.
Oh, the rattle can.
- [Davin] Here we've got
the traditional rattle can.
And to clarify, regardless
of what it looks like
when we go to spray color
on there, that is Ford red,
not Chevy orange.
Just to verify.
I know we had a lot of
people that were concerned
that we put hugger orange on a Ford motor
and that would be absolute blasphemy
even for a Chevy guy
to do on a Ford engine.
- [Ben] All right.
- [Davin] We have this,
our little makeshift booth,
and it does a pretty decent job.
- [Ben] All right, paint is done.
Oooh.
- [Davin] All right, here we go.
- [Ben] Moody.
- [Davin] Just pulling
all the masking tape off
so we can get to our machine
surfaces and start assembling.
Now here we're putting in
the three main bearings.
So, the idea is, just
before you install the
crankshaft, you should always
check the bearing clearance,
the actual clearance.
So you put the bearings in.
You torque down the main
caps and you check that ID
or the diameter, and then
compare that to the OD
of the bearing surface on the crankshaft,
and that gets you your bearing clearance.
You know, you're looking
for something around
a thousandth to two and a
half, somewhere in that range.
Likewise for the rods.
And then we get into the
assembly side of it here.
So just to qualify that we did all of our
checks before we started assembling.
- [Ben] Now it looks like
you're spreading something?
- [Davin] Yep, so that's
putting in the rear main seal
right there, putting a little goop on it.
- [Ben] And there's all sorts of goop.
You've got some goop on
the crankshaft there,
is that stuff specifically for--
- [Davin] Yep, it's assembly
lube for that initially.
You certainly would not want to have it
start up dry.
You would take the bearings
out of it immediately.
So you use assembly lube and
you can use oil but the
assembly lube stays in
place a lot better, it
doesn't run so much.
Especially in that
initial startup, because
you have a little extra
friction in there from normal.
All right, so here we're
taking all the pistons,
these pistons use a floating
wrist pin, so instead
of being pressed on--
- [Ben] Hold on, what's
a floating wrist pin?
- [Davin] All right, so
you have, you have two ways
to attach the rods to the pistons.
Always with a wrist pin,
but sometimes that wrist pin
is floating versus pressed.
Floating meaning it
floats relative to the rod
and the piston.
Pressed onto the rod versus floating.
So you'll see we have
some retainer rings here
as we go.
- [Ben] So you'll, with
the pressed, you'd have to
have a tool like a
pneumatic press to literally
press it in?
- [Davin] Actually, you
heat up the small end of
the rod and press them on.
- [Ben] The heat would
expand the rod and allow,
or, the rod allowing the pin--
- [Davin] To slide through.
Yep, and then of course
it contracts and pulls it
into position.
- [Ben] Cool.
But that's not what's happening here.
- [Davin] That is not
what's happening here.
This has a bushing,
you can see it, you can
see the brass piece, that's
a bushing on those rods.
And they are, they're
slip fit, so it will,
it's very tight but it
will slip, a slip fit.
Put some oil on them, they'll slip in.
Likewise into the pistons and then you can
see the needle-nose pliers you use.
There's a little retaining
ring that goes in there.
Here we're putting cam bearings in.
- [Ben] Hammering something.
- [Davin] Oh yeah, hammering
in the cam bearings.
- [Ben] And those bearings
are similar to the crankshaft
bearings, they're just,
they're, when you say bearings,
they're just pieces of metal?
- [Davin] Yep, they're the
same style of bearing material
as your main bearings, but
instead of being two halves,
they're actually a full circle.
- [Ben] So, we've got some
more piston action here.
What's, now, what am I seeing there?
- [Davin] So now all the pistons are ready
to go in and Matt is holding
on to a ring compressor.
So the ring is naturally
has some tension out
towards the bore, that's
basically what helps
them seal is they have
tension so you have to
compress them slightly to
get them into the hole.
So that's what this ring compressor does.
It plants around that piston and then and
I usually use that little,
that black dead blow,
and just pop it with
the handle to knock them
into the hole.
You've got to be really
careful, because if that
ring compressor is not tight
across the top of the block
as it goes on to the bore,
your ring could slip through,
and if it doesn't go easy,
you'll break it, you'll
break the ring off when you go in.
- [Ben] Do those have torque
specs there, or what's the--
- [Davin] Yep, there's a
torque spec relative to
the rod bolts and it's
very important to follow
that torque spec.
Most failures in the piston
area is the rod bolt.
It's, there's times where
it's the rods itself
but it's usually the bolt, that
fastening is very critical.
And then you'll see here, here
goes, here's the crankshaft,
or the camshaft going in.
You'll notice that there
is different lube on
the lobes of the crankshaft
versus the bearings.
Quite frankly, you can use molybdenum on
the bearings, you can also
use the camshaft break-in lube
on the bearings as well.
I choose to put as much
on the lobes as possible
because a camshaft has,
it can have premature
failure really fast if you
don't break it in correctly.
And since we pointed it out
at the beginning with the
timing gear, you'll notice
that this timing gear
is now aluminum, as opposed
to the composite setup.
Some of the reason is the
composites just aren't
available, and the aluminum
tends to be a little better.
And of course torque
spec on the cam retainer.
- [Ben] So with the
aligning there, how do you,
how do you know where
your crankshaft is and
where your camshaft is?
- [Davin] So what happens
is, so you rotate your
crankshaft to have the
number one piston at
top dead center, or the top of its stroke.
- [Ben] So looking here, that's the--
- [Davin] Far left.
- [Ben] Piston closest to you on the left.
- [Davin] Correct.
And then the timing gear
can only go on the camshaft
one way and on there, on
the face of that, there is
a mark that you align with the crankshaft.
- [Ben] Okay, so it's that easy.
- [Davin] Yeah, it's that easy.
So here the lifters are
going in, which these are
adjustable lifters for
the, you can see the little
hex set hanging up out of the top.
- [Ben] Okay, yep.
- [Davin] These are, in
my opinion, a royal pain
in the rumpus to adjust.
- [Ben] Well, because
they're in there, and that's
a tight space.
- [Davin] And you have
to have a little special
like, spanner wrench to reach in there and
you'll see as we start putting valves in,
the space gets eat up real quick.
- [Ben] Oh, jeez.
- [Davin] So here's the
valves into the guides.
And the, so the guides in
this all can be preassembled,
so you can see on the
right-hand side, you've got
the spring, the retainer, the guides.
When we took it all apart,
the guides were physically
stuck into the block so
we couldn't show that
because most of them didn't come out.
- [Ben] So did the
machine shop have to take
them out for you or what?
- [Davin] Yeah, yep.
You see plenty of lubrication
again on the lifters.
- [Ben] Okay, it looks
like you're using that
ring compressor again and that is--
- [Davin] Yep, putting
that retainer in there.
- [Ben] So to keep the
valves from flying out.
- [Davin] Yep, yeah, exactly.
- [Ben] Important.
- [Davin] This is the brand new oil pump.
Here's our fresh, freshly painted oil pan.
- [Ben] It's coming together here.
- [Davin] Put some screws in it.
Of course a little schmutz
on the cork gasket.
- [Ben] What kind of schmutz?
What are you using on it?
- [Davin] Usually, I
think that was a Grey RTV.
- [Ben] What's on the front,
sticking out here, now?
- [Davin] That, we just
got that setup so we can
put that on a balancer.
It's a balancer puller, or
installer, in this case.
So, balancer and pulleys.
- [Ben] Oh, okay.
So it's just to press it onto--
- [Davin] Yeah, you do not
want to hammer a balancer,
onto a crankshaft.
That thrust bearing will not like it.
- [Ben] And I recognize these guys.
- [Davin] Yep, here comes
our steel freshwater pumps.
So here's one trick I've got to point out.
So, before you put this together, always
tighten down the bolt
that's in the water hose.
- [Ben] Oh, yeah.
- [Davin] Don't forget to tighten that.
I don't tell you how I
know, but don't forget
to tighten down that bolt.
- [Ben] I bet you I know how.
It leaked, didn't it?
- [Davin] Yes, it does.
And you have to pull
all the coolant out and
the hose to get to that bolt, of course.
- [Ben] Oh, yeah, that's
something you learn
once and probably don't ever forget.
- [Davin] And never forget, yep.
Now here's all the
porcupine quills going in
out of the head studs,
which is kind of the
final step here on the
heads, put in studs, put in,
I always use some Teflon sealant
in case there's one that
goes into the jacket.
It also helps them come
back out if you ever
have to take them back out.
- [Ben] Set yourself up for success.
- [Davin] Exactly, yep.
- [Ben] All right, and oh,
that looks like a fancy gasket.
- [Davin] Brand new head gasket.
- [Ben] That's not cork.
- [Davin] Nope.
- [Ben] So that looks
like it's lined with a
bunch of metal bits.
What does that do for it?
- [Davin] Yes, you have,
around the combustion
chamber you have that
metal ring that seals
the chamber off very well, a
fire ring, they refer to it.
- [Ben] So it's like a softer
metal that will compress
between--
- [Davin] Yeah, between
there but also it'll take
that heat.
And then you have the
gasket material around the
outside for the water jacket and such.
- [Ben] So already I'm
noticing something different.
The heads last time were
held on by long bolts.
And now you have studs and nuts.
- [Davin] Yep, yep, we
went to the stud and nut
setup because they're just sexy, no.
- [Ben] So this is,
obviously, this isn't the--
- [Davin] No.
- [Ben] This isn't the original head.
- [Davin] We certainly
took some liberties here
and because we're not
trying to go after any
sort of bone originality
with the pickup truck,
we opted for a couple of hot
rod parts, first of which,
well, you already saw one.
We have a three-quarter
race cam, as it's known
on the street, for the camshaft.
Pistons were the same
as far as dome-wise and
then this higher compression
head from Edelbrock,
both aluminum and finned.
So for those with a lot
of fingers, there's 24
acorn nuts in this bad boy.
That is a lot of head bolts.
- [Ben] That is.
- [Davin] And same
thing on the other side.
- [Ben] So at this point,
you didn't put anything
else on, because why?
Like, right now I'm looking
at a filthy intake manifold.
- [Davin] Filthy pickup truck?
The reason why we haven't, we did not
put the other intake
and you'll see why here.
The old intake made a much
better lift point than
the new intake.
And you'll see as we get there.
So we decided that at this
point we were going to use,
go back to the old intake.
We were going to put on the transmission.
Basically, reverse of pulling it apart,
and then we'll swap
out the intake manifold
when we get there.
So we pulled the old intake back off,
put the lift plates on it.
This is the flywheel going on.
- [Ben] Did you do anything
to the transmission or no?
- [Davin] No, we did not.
Some headers going on.
- [Ben] They look much
nicer than the old--
- [Davin] The ugly old caps.
- [Ben] Manifolds that
were on there, especially
with your fancy bolts
that you have on there.
- [Davin] Oh yeah.
Yeah, you'll notice
that all these bolts are
the right size, length and--
- [Ben] You didn't have
to use bolt washers?
- [Davin] Yeah.
- [Ben] Oh, spark plugs, that's new.
- [Davin] Yep, fresh set of plugs.
And it's very critical
to get the right length
plugs so they don't hit the pistons.
- [Ben] Now is that something that changes
because you have different
heads on them now?
- [Davin] Um, possibly, yes.
- [Ben] You seem to be--
- [Davin] Well for all
intents and purposes, there's
only two different lengths of, a long and
a short-throw plug.
- [Ben] So, Davin, did
you get the wrong one
the first time?
- [Davin] We might have had the wrong ones
the first time.
So, fresh motor in the old pickup truck.
That engine leveler
makes everything so nice.
- [Ben] All right, so
you're just fiddling with
some stuff, probably, what
are you doing at this point?
- [Davin] You're putting the
motor mounts in right there.
Now we're--
- [Ben] Off comes the tape.
- [Davin] Yep.
Now we're setting in, the
engine is still at top dead
center so we dropped in
the distributor, didn't
want it in the way dropping
it in because you'd
hate to break that off.
I'm putting in the coil right there,
and the temp-sending
units and here goes in
some engine break-in oil.
Might as well do it now, it's a lot easier
to pour in than later, got a gaping hole
instead of a little dinky one.
So here's our intake manifold gasket,
sprayed on some copper
coat to help seal it up.
And then this is why we
did not reuse the old
intake manifold.
Because this already--
- [Ben] Preassembled.
- [Davin] Preassembled.
I preassembled this to drop on.
- [Ben] That looks nice.
- [Davin] Yeah, so this
is our additional hot rod
part, going to a two-barrel
setup, or a two-barrel,
deuce setup, whatever way
you want to look at it that.
This is Edelbrock's slingshot manifold
and from the side you'll see it's a V or
why they call it a slingshot.
- I can sort of see it there.
- [Davin] So they started
making the flatheads in '32,
Edelbrock had a upgrade in '34.
That is still the best
horsepower-producing
intake manifold with the exception of one.
- [Ben] So they got it right.
- [Davin] Yes, they did a very good job.
You'll see us put on the generator off the
front of that.
We had to do a little
bit of customizing to
make it fit well.
- [Ben] What kind of
carburetors are on this?
- [Davin] Those are Edelbrock 194s.
- [Ben] Fuel lines, now
why, how 'come clear
fuel lines?
- [Davin] Well, they look sexy.
- [Ben] I'm okay with that answer.
The more practical side
of me is like, well,
it's also, you can tell
if it's getting fuel.
- [Davin] Well, there is that.
We did reuse those spark
plug wires, if you notice.
- [Ben] I do.
They were already pretty newish.
- [Davin] And the fan
is, we reused, basically
any parts that we could
reuse from the original
build, we did.
You know, if they were
new there was no reason
to throw those out.
The generator was, the guts
are cleaned up on that.
The battery is going back in.
I'm tightening down the hose clamps.
At this point we're
ready for the radiator.
All right.
- [Ben] Oh, this is the real video.
- [Davin] This is the test.
All right, so we've got
fuel going up the lines,
we can see that.
(engine cranking)
(engine running)
- [Ben] It's alive.
- [Davin] And that is the best feeling.
- [Ben] I love the look that
you give the camera there.
You were pretty psyched.
- [Davin] So, throw the hood back on, make
it a little bit more aerodynamic.
- [Ben] These trucks were known for--
- [Davin] Yep.
- [Ben] So that's pretty much it.
- [Davin] That's a wrap on this one.
The only thing that's left
here is, go for a ride.
- [Ben] Of course we've
got our GoPros up there
because the camera guys
have got to put cameras
on everything.
I used my skateboard for this shot.
- [Davin] Yes, Ben, I
was impressed with that.
- [Ben] Skitched for a bit and off you go.
- [Davin] Yeah.
- [Ben] Just like that.
Well, good work, man.
- [Davin] Thank you.
- [Ben] Well, thanks, guys, for watching.
If I left anything out, let us know in the
comments or ask any other questions.
We'll do our, do our
best to answer and again,
if you have any questions
about video stuff,
you can ask me.
Otherwise Davin can shoot
back some answers on
anything regarding the rebuild.
- [Davin] Yep, absolutely.
And stay tuned, you never know,
we might have another one.
- [Ben] Or two.
- [Davin] Or two.
- [Ben] Or five.
- Five. (laughs)
- [Ben] Or as long as
you guys keep watching,
we'll keep doing it.
- [Davin] Sweet, that's right.